= Indulgence

Yet another permissions gem.

In creating Indulgence I wanted a role based permissions tool that did two main 
things:

* Determine what permission a user had to do something to an object
* Filtered a search of objects based on the those permissions

It was apparent to me that if 'something' was one of the CRUD actions, it would
cover most of the use cases I could think of. So permissions were sub-divided 
into the 'actions': create, read, update, and delete.

The other requirement was that the permission for an object could be defined
succinctly within a single file.

== Defining indulgent permissions

Indulgence can be added to a class via acts_as_indulgent:

    class Thing < ActiveRecord::Base
      acts_as_indulgent
    end

Used in this way, permissions need to be defined in an Indulgence::Permission
object called ThingPermission, with an instance method :default

    class ThingPermission < Indulgence::Permission

      def default
        {
          create: none,
          read: all,
          update: none,
          delete: none
        }
      end

    end

This needs to be available to the Thing class. For example, in a rails app, by
placing it in app/permissions/thing_permission.rb

== Users and Roles

Indulgence assumes that permissions will be tested against an entity object
(e.g. User). The default behaviour assumes that the entity object has a :role 
method that returns the role object, and that the role object has a :name method. 

So typically, these objects could look like this:

    class User < ActiveRecord::Base 
      belongs_to :role
    end

    class Role < ActiveRecord::Base
      has_many :users
      validates :name, :uniqueness => true
    end
    
    pleb = Role.create(:name => 'pleb')
    user = User.create(
      :first_name => 'Joe', 
      :last_name => 'Blogs',
      :role => pleb
    ) 

== Compare single item: indulge?

Simple true/false permission can be determined using the :indulge? method:

    thing = Thing.first

    thing.indulge?(user, :create) == false
    thing.indulge?(user, :read)   == true
    thing.indulge?(user, :update) == false
    thing.indulge?(user, :delete) == false

== Filter many: indulgence

The :indulgence method is used as a where filter:

    Thing.indulgence(user, :create) --> raises ActiveRecord::RecordNotFound
    Thing.indulgence(user, :read) == Thing.all
    Thing.indulgence(user, :update) --> raises ActiveRecord::RecordNotFound
    Thing.indulgence(user, :delete) --> raises ActiveRecord::RecordNotFound

So to find all the blue things that the user has permission to read:

    Thing.indulgence(user, :read).where(:colour => 'blue')

== Customisation

=== Adding other roles

Up until now, all users get the same permissions irrespective of role. Let's
give Emperors the right to see and do anything by first creating an emperor

    emperor = Role.create(:name => 'emperor')
    caesar = User.create(
      :first_name => 'Julius', 
      :last_name => 'Ceasar',
      :role => emperor
    )

And then defining what they can do by adding these two methods to ThingPermission:

    def abilities
      {
        emperor: default.merge(emperor)
      }
    end

    def emperor
      {
        create: all,
        update: all,
        delete: all
      }
    end

This uses a merger of the default abilities so that only the variant abilities
need to be defined in the emperor method. That is, _read_ is inherited from 
_default_ rather than being defined in _emperor_, as it is already set to *all*.

abilities is a hash of hashes. The lowest level, associates action names with
ability objects. The top level associates role names to the lower level ability 
object hashes. In this simple case, construction is perhaps clearer if the 
abilities method above was written like this:

    def abilities
      {
        emperor: {
          create: all,
          read:   default[:read],
          update: all,
          delete: all
        }
      }         
    end

With this done:

    thing.indulge?(caesar, :create) == true
    thing.indulge?(caesar, :read)   == true
    thing.indulge?(caesar, :update) == true
    thing.indulge?(caesar, :delete) == true

    Thing.indulgence(caesar, :create) == Thing.all
    Thing.indulgence(caesar, :read)   == Thing.all
    Thing.indulgence(caesar, :update) == Thing.all
    Thing.indulgence(caesar, :delete) == Thing.all

=== Adding abilities

Indulgence has two built in abilities. These are *all* and *none*. These two
have provided all the functionality described above, but in most real cases
some more fine tuned ability setting will be needed.

Let's create an author role, and give authors the ability to create and update
their own things. 

    author = Role.create(:name => :author)

Next we need to give author's ownership of things. So we add an :author_id 
attribute to Thing, and a matching :author method:

    class Thing < ActiveRecord::Base
      acts_as_indulgent
      belongs_to :author, :class_name => 'User'
    end

Then we need to create an Ability that uses this relationship to determine
permissions. This can be done by adding this method to ThingPermission:

  def things_they_wrote
    define_ability(
      :name => :things_they_wrote,
      :compare_single => lambda {|thing, user| thing.author_id == user.id},
      :filter_many => lambda {|things, user| things.where(:author_id => user.id)}
    )
  end

This will create an Ability object with the following methods:

[name]           Allows abilities of the same kind to be matched
[compare_single] Used by :indulge?
[filter_many]    Used by :indulgence 

==== Compare single

_compare_single_ should be a lambda that is passed the object being tested and
the entity it is to be tested against. The lambda returns _true_ if permission 
should be given. Otherwise _false_ should be returned.

Alternatively, instead of a lambda, any object can be used that returns _true_
or _false_ when it _call_ method is passed the object and the entity.

==== Filter many

In this example: 

    Thing.indulgence(user, :read) == Thing.where(:author => user)

if the :read ability is matched to *things_they_wrote*

Once *things_they_wrote* has been defined, we can use it to define a new set
of abilities:

    def abilities
      {
        emperor: default.merge(emperor),
        author:  default.merge(author)
      }
    end

    def author
      {
        create: things_they_wrote,
        update: things_they_wrote
      }
    end

With that done:

    cicero = User.create(
      :first_name => 'Marcus', 
      :last_name => 'Cicero', 
      :role => author
    )

    thing.update_attribute :author, cicero

    thing.indulge?(cicero, :create) == true
    thing.indulge?(cicero, :read)   == true
    thing.indulge?(cicero, :update) == true
    thing.indulge?(cicero, :delete) == false

    Thing.indulgence(cicero, :create) == [thing]
    Thing.indulgence(cicero, :read)   == Thing.all
    Thing.indulgence(cicero, :update) == [thing]
    Thing.indulgence(cicero, :delete)  --> raises ActiveRecord::RecordNotFound

=== Defining your own actions

The default actions on which indulgence is based are the CRUD operations: 
_create_, _read_, _update_ and _delete_. You can add your own actions, or
define a completely different action set if you prefer. 

So for example when showing information about a thing, we could 
display a warning that only emperors should see.

First update ThingPermissions like this:

    def default
      {
        create: none,
        read: all,
        update: none,
        delete: none,
        prophecy: none,
      }
    end

    def emperor
      {
        create: all,
        update: all,
        delete: all,
        prophecy: all
      }
    end

And then in views/things/show.html.erb add:

    <%= "Beware the Ides of March" if @thing.indulge?(current_user, :prophecy) %>

=== Alternative Permission Class

As stated above, the default behaviour is for a Thing class to expect its
permissions to be defined in ThingPermission. However, you can define an 
alternative class name:

    acts_as_indulgent :using => PermissionsForThing

=== Alternative Entity behaviour

Consider this example:

    class User < ActiveRecord::Base 
      belongs_to :position
    end

    class Position < ActiveRecord::Base
      has_many :users
      validates :title, :uniqueness => true
    end

There are two ways of dealing with this. 

If only ThingPermission is affected, the attributes that stores the _role_method_ 
and _role_name_method_ could be overwritten:

    class ThingPermission < Indulgence::Permission

      def self.role_method
        :position
      end

      def self.role_name_method
        :title
      end

      .....
    end

Alternatively if all permissions were to be altered the super class Permission 
could be updated (for example in a rails initializer):

    Indulgence::Permission.role_method = :position
    Indulgence::Permission.role_name_method = :title

=== Alternative method names

The method names _indulgence_ and _indulge?_ may not suit your application. If
you wish to use alternative names, they can be aliased like this:

    acts_as_indulgent(
      :compare_single_method => :permit?,
      :filter_many_method => :permitted
    )

With this used to define indulgence in Thing, we can do this:

    thing.permit?(cicero, :update) == true
    thing.permit?(cicero, :delete) == false

    Thing.permitted(cicero, :create) == [thing]
    Thing.permitted(cicero, :read)   == Thing.all

== Examples

For some examples, have a look at the tests. In particular, look at the object
definitions in test/lib. 

== Playing with Indulgence

This app has a set of tests associated with it. The test suite includes the
configuration for a sqlite3 test database, with migrations and fixtures. If you
wish to play with, and/or modify Indulgence: fork the project and clone a local
copy. Run bundler to install the necessary gems. Then use this command to
create the test database:

    rake db:migrate RAILS_ENV=test

If this raises no errors, you should then be able to run the tests with:

    rake test